[SIEMINT-71] DDS: OSSEC Integration (#17938)
DataDog/integrations-core: ossec_security/README.md

# Agent Integration: ossec-security

## Overview

> [OSSEC][4] is an Open Source Host based Intrusion Detection System. It performs log analysis, integrity checking, Windows registry monitoring, rootkit detection, real-time alerting and active response. It helps to monitor and manage security events across various IT infrastructures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OSSEC][4] is an open source, host based intrusion detection system. It performs log analysis, integrity checking, Windows registry monitoring, rootkit detection, real-time alerting and active response. It helps to monitor and manage security events across various IT infrastructures.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

This integration ingests the following types of logs:
- FTPD
- Firewall
- System
- Syslog
- SSHD

> - Pam

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PAM
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

- Windows

> - Web Access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Web access
```

> Visualize detailed insights into Firewall, FTPD, System, Syslog, SSHD, Pam, Windows, Web Access logs through the out-of-the-box dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visualize detailed insights into these logs through the out-of-the-box dashboards.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

## Setup

### Installation

To install the OSSEC Security integration, run the following Agent installation command and the steps below. For more information, see the [Integration Management][6] documentation.

**Note**: This step is not necessary for Agent version >= 7.54.0.

Linux command
  ```shell
  sudo -u dd-agent -- datadog-agent integration install datadog-ossec_security==1.0.0
  ```

### Configuration

> #### Logs Collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Logs collection
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

> 1. Collecting logs is disabled by default in the Datadog Agent. Enable it in datadog.yaml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Collecting logs is disabled by default in the Datadog Agent. Enable it in `datadog.yaml`:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>     ```shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```yaml
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

    logs_enabled: true
    ```
2. Add this configuration block to your `ossec_security.d/conf.yaml` file to start collecting your logs.

>     We will be using the UDP method to collect the OSSEC alerts data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Use the UDP method to collect the OSSEC alerts data.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

    See the [sample ossec_security.d/conf.yaml][8] for available configuration options.

    ```yaml
      logs:
      - type: udp
        port: <PORT>
        source: ossec-security
        service: ossec-security
    ```

>     **Note**: It is recommended not to change the service and source values as these parameters are integral to the pipeline's operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Note**: It is recommended not to change the service and source values, as these parameters are integral to the pipeline's operation.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

3. [Restart the Agent][3].

> #### Configure Syslog Message Forwarding from OSSEC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Configure syslog message forwarding from OSSEC
```

Reviewer: Unless "Syslog Message Forwarding" is an official feature name, in which case leave it capitalized.

Author: Updated as per suggestion

  1. Add following configuration in `/var/ossec/etc/ossec.conf`.

>       In this example all alerts are sent to 1.1.1.1 on port 8080 in **JSON** format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      In this example, all alerts are sent to 1.1.1.1 on port 8080 in JSON format.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

      ```xml
        <syslog_output>
          <server>1.1.1.1</server>
          <port>8080</port>
          <format>json</format>
        </syslog_output>
      ```

>       *IP_ADDRESS(1.1.1.1): ip address where your datadog-agent is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * The `server` tag should contain the IP address where your Datadog Agent is running.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>       *PORT(8080): port on which your datadog-agent is listening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * The `port` tag should contain the port on which your Datadog Agent is listening.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>       Note: Using JSON format is required since OSSEC Security pipeline parses JSON formatted logs only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Note: Using JSON format is required, since OSSEC Security pipeline parses JSON formatted logs only.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>   2. After this change is made, the client-syslog process should be enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Enable the client-syslog process:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

      ```shell
      /var/ossec/bin/ossec-control enable client-syslog
      ```

>   3. Restart OSSEC service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. Restart the OSSEC service:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

      ```shell
      /var/ossec/bin/ossec-control restart
      ```

> #### Firewall Logs Collection[Optional]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Enable firewall logs collection (optional)
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

> Since OSSEC server does not forward the firewall alert logs via syslog by default, if you want to forward firewall alert logs via OSSEC server follow the below step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OSSEC server does not forward the firewall alert logs by default. To forward firewall alert logs via OSSEC server, follow the steps below.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>   1. Locate `firewall_rules.xml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Locate the `firewall_rules.xml` file at `/var/ossec/rules/firewall_rules.xml`.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

  ```

>   /var/ossec/rules/firewall_rules.xml

Reviewer: I recommend removing this in favor of the edit above, we don't usually list paths as standalone code blocks.

Author: Updated as per suggestion

  ```

>   2. Edit firewall_rules.xml and remove all the occurrences of below line from the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Edit `firewall_rules.xml` to remove all occurrences of the below line from the file:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

  ```xml
  <options>no_log</options>
  ``` 

  3. Restart your OSSEC server:
  ```shell
  /var/ossec/bin/ossec-control restart
  ```

> #### Changes in OSSEC Security Datadog log pipeline for timezone other than UTC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Specify a time zone other than UTC in the OSSEC Security Datadog log pipeline
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

> Since Datadog expects all the logs in UTC timezone by default, If the timezone of your OSSEC logs is other than UTC, please specify it in the OSSEC Security datadog pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog expects all logs to be in the UTC time zone by default. If the timezone of your OSSEC logs is not UTC, specify the correct time zone in the OSSEC Security Datadog pipeline.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

> In order to change the timezone in OSSEC Security pipeline follow the below steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change the time zone in OSSEC Security pipeline:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>   1. Navigate to Pipelines in the datadog cloud account. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Navigate to the [**Pipelines** page][10] in the Datadog app. 
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>       - Go to Logs -> Log Stream -> Pipelines.

Reviewer: This line can be deleted, since the correct page is linked above.

>   2. Search for `OSSEC Security` using Filter Pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Enter "OSSEC Security" in the **Filter Pipelines** search box.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>   3. Clone `OSSEC Security` pipeline in order to change the timezone.

Reviewer: I recommend deleting this line and just starting this step with "Hover over ...". Customers are sometimes confused by summary lines like these, thinking they're expected to know how to carry out the instruction without reading further.

Author: removed summary and replaced with steps

>       - Hover over the `OSSEC Security` pipeline and click on the `clone`  button. This will clone the `OSSEC Security` pipeline which will be editable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Hover over the OSSEC Security pipeline and click on the **clone**  button. This will create an editable clone of the OSSEC Security pipeline.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>   4. Edit the Grok Parser using below steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  4. Edit the Grok Parser using the below steps:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>       - Find a processor with the name "Grok Parser: Parsing OSSEC alerts" and click on the `Edit` button by hovering over the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - In the cloned pipeline, find a processor with the name "Grok Parser: Parsing OSSEC alerts" and click on the `Edit` button by hovering over the pipeline.
```
If "in the cloned pipeline" is incorrect, provide some other location hint here.

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>       - Under the Define parsing rules,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Under **Define parsing rules**,
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>         - Change the string `UTC` to the timezone of your OSSEC server. For example, if your timezone is IST then as per the timezone mentioned in the below reference link,you need to replace the value as `Asia/Calcutta`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Change the string `UTC` to the [TZ identifier][9] of the time zone of your OSSEC server. For example, if your timezone is IST, you would change the value to`Asia/Calcutta`. 
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>         Timezone IDs are pulled from the TZ database. For more information, [see TZ database names][9].

Reviewer: This line can be deleted, since TZ identifiers are now covered above.

Author: removed as per suggestion

>       - Click on the `update` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Click the **update** button.
```

Author: ![Uploading image.png…]()

### Validation

[Run the Agent's status subcommand][7] and look for `ossec_security` under the Checks section.

## Data Collected

### Log 

| Format     | Event Types    |
| ---------  | -------------- |
| JSON | syslog, sshd, pam, ossec, windows, firewall, ftpd, web_access |

### Metrics

> The OSSEC Security does not include any metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OSSEC Security integration does not include any metrics.
```

### Events

The OSSEC Security integration does not include any events.

### Service Checks

The OSSEC Security integration does not include any service checks.

## Troubleshooting

**Permission denied while port binding:**

> If you see a **Permission denied** error while port binding in the Agent logs, see the following instructions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see a **Permission denied** error while port binding in the Agent logs:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

1. Binding to a port number under 1024 requires elevated permissions. Grant access to the port using the `setcap` command:
    ```shell
    sudo setcap CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE=+ep /opt/datadog-agent/bin/agent/agent
    ```

2. Verify the setup is correct by running the `getcap` command:

    ```shell
    sudo getcap /opt/datadog-agent/bin/agent/agent
    ```

    With the expected output:

    ```shell
    /opt/datadog-agent/bin/agent/agent = cap_net_bind_service+ep
    ```

    **Note**: Re-run this `setcap` command every time you upgrade the Agent.

3. [Restart the Agent][3].

**Data is not being collected:**

Make sure that traffic is bypassed from the configured port if the firewall is enabled.

**Port already in use:**

> - If you see the **Port <PORT-NO> Already in Use** error, see the following instructions. The example below is for PORT-NO = 514:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you see the **Port <PORT_NUMBER> Already in Use** error, see the following instructions. The example below is for port 514:
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

- On systems using Syslog, if the Agent listens for OSSEC logs on port 514, the following error can appear in the Agent logs: `Can't start UDP forwarder on port 514: listen udp :514: bind: address already in use`.

> - This error occurs because by default, Syslog listens on port 514. To resolve this error, take **one** of the following steps: 

Reviewer: Combine this bullet with the one above

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>     - Disable Syslog 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Disable Syslog.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

>     - Configure the Agent to listen on a different, available port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Configure the Agent to listen on a different, available port.
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

> For any further assistance, contact [Datadog support][1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further assistance, contact [Datadog support][1].
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion

[1]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/
[2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings/agent/latest
[3]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-commands/#start-stop-and-restart-the-agent
[4]: https://www.ossec.net/
[5]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/ossec_security/assets/service_checks.json
[6]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/integration-management/?tab=linux#install
[7]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/agent/guide/agent-commands/#agent-status-and-information
[8]: https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/master/ossec_security/datadog_checks/ossec_security/data/conf.yaml.example

> [9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_tz_database_time_zones
[10]: https://app.datadoghq.com/logs/pipelines
```

Author: Updated as per suggestion
